---
layout: post
title:  "Using the State Hook"
date:   2021-03-28 09:26:11 -0700
categories: jekyll update
author: Juan Cobian
---

*Hooks are a new addition in React 16.8. They allow us to use state and other React features without writing classes.*

Here is an example of a Hook:

```
import React, { useState } from 'react';

function Example() {
    // Declare a new state variable, which we'll call "count"
    const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

    return (
        <div>
            <p>You clicked {count} times</p>
            <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>
                Click me
            </button>
        </div>
    );
}
```

We will start learning Hooks by comparing them to an equivalent class example.

> Don't worry if this doesn't make sense yet!

## Similar Class Example

If you've worked with React classes before, this should look familiar:

```
class Example extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      count: 0
    };
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <p>You clicked {this.state.count} times</p>
        <button onClick={() => this.setState({ count: this.state.count + 1 })}>
          Click me
        </button>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```

We start by setting the `{count: 0}` in our state, and we will increment `state.count` when the user clicks a button
calling `this.setState()`.

## Hooks and Function Components

This is what function components look like:

```
const Example = (props) => {
  // You can use Hooks here!
  return <div />;
}
```

or this:

```
function Example(props) {
  // You can use Hooks here!
  return <div />;
}
```

These are known as `stateless components`. With Hooks, we now have the ability to use React `state`. These are best
known as `function components`.

Hooks **don't** work inside of classes.

## What's a Hook?

We will begin with the `useState` Hook:

```
import React, { useState } from 'react';

function Example() {
  // ...
}
```

A Hook is a special function that allows you to 'hook into' React features. `useState` Hook allows you to add state
to `function components`.

Best time to use a Hook, is when you are writing a `function component` or `stateless component` and you realize you
need to add state to it. Before we had to convert it into a class component, now you can use Hook inside an existing
function component.

## Declaring a State Variable

In a class, we initialize `count` state to `0` by setting `this.state` to `{ count: 0 }` in the class constructor:

```
class Example extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = {
      count: 0
    };
  }
```

In a function component, we don't have access to `this` so we can't call `this.state`. Instead, we call the Hook
directly inside the component:

```
import React, { useState } from 'react';

function Example() {
  // Declare a new state variable, which we'll call "count"
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
```

`useState` declares a `state variable`. Our variable is called `count` but it could called whatever we want, like
`banana`. `useState` is a new way to use the exact same capabilities that `this.state` provides in classes.
Normally variables in functions disappear when the function exits but state variables in React are preserved.

The only argument to the `useState()` Hook is the initial state. It doesn't have to be an object like in classes.
It can be a number or string, in our example we used a number for the times a user clicks the button.

`useState` return a pair of values: the current state and a function that updates it. In our example, we wrote
`const [count, setCount] = useState(0)` this is similar to `this.state.count` and `this.setState()` in a class.

Now that we know what the `useState` Hook does and how it works. We can circle back around to our previous example, this
should make more sense:

```
import React, { useState } from 'react';

function Example() {
  // Declare a new state variable, which we'll call "count"
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
```

We set a state variable `count ` and set it to `0`. React will now remember this every time it re-renders, and
provide the most recent value in our function. If we can to update our current `count`, we have to call our 
`setCount()` function.

## Reading State

This is how we display count in a class:

```
 <p>You clicked {this.state.count} times</p>
```

In a function component, we can call it directly:

```
 <p>You clicked {count} times</p>
```

## Updating State

In a class, we update state by calling `this.setState()`:

```
<button onClick={() => this.setState({ count: this.state.count + 1 })}>
    Click me
  </button>
```

In a function component, we have `setCount` and `count` as variables so we don't need `this`:

```
 <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>
    Click me
 </button>
```

## Summary

Let's recap what we have learned line by line:

```
 1:  import React, { useState } from 'react';
 2:
 3:  function Example() {
 4:    const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
 5:
 6:    return (
 7:      <div>
 8:        <p>You clicked {count} times</p>
 9:        <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>
10:         Click me
11:        </button>
12:      </div>
13:    );
14:  }
```

Line 1: We are importing the `useState` from React.
Line 4: We are declaring our `count` variable and setting our initial state to `0` using `useState()`.
We are also setting `setCount` as our updating function. This allows us to update the count.
Line 9: When the user clicks the button, it will update the `count` by calling the `setCount` function. React
will re-render with the new value.

> Next time we will learn about the `useEffect` Hook.